APPEND

In this demonstration we will illustrate how to append datasets.

To begin, create a new Workflow.

First, let’s import 3 datasets. Drag 3 "file import" nodes onto the canvas.

Double click the first node and import the Text dataset file “Week 25”

For the second node, import an Excel dataset using file “Week 24”

Lastly, import another Text dataset file “Base Demographics”

Let’s take a look at the dataset to understand the data and fields.

As we can see, Week 25 and 24 are transactional data with 3 columns. While the columns provide the same information the field names are different in each dataset.

Base Demographics shares demographic details for each customer ID.

Let’s append datasets Week 24 and Week 25 into a single dataset.

Drag an Append node from the Manipulate palette onto the canvas.

Connect both imported datasets.

Double click to open the wizard.

Set an appropriate name for the appended dataset.

Click next.

On this page, select which fields from our second dataset need to be made to match with the first dataset.

Let’s go ahead and match “Number of Sales” with “Number of Products,” and “Price” with “Cost”.

Click next.

Here, we can click Refresh to see a sample preview of both datasets.

Click Next. Now, we can select fields to include in the output dataset, let’s keep all 3 of them.

Click run to generate the output.

Double clicking on the output dataset, we can see the record count for both datasets used and the new appended record count.

AGGREGATE

In this demonstration we will illustrate how to aggregate datasets. We will continue from the append demonstration.

We will aggregate the dataset so we have 1 row per customer ID instead of multiple rows from the created appended dataset.

Drag an Aggregate node onto the canvas.

Connect the Append output dataset.

Double click to open the wizard.

First, let’s select the field we want to group by, in this case customer ID.

Click Next.

Here, we can create aggregation fields with various functions to summarize the data for each group.

First, name the new aggregate output dataset that will be created.

Let’s add 3 aggregation fields.

Select Number of Sales and set the function to Average.

Select Price and set the function to Average.

Select Price once more and set the function to Sum.

Adjust the resulting field names as needed.

After confirming everything is correct, click run.

Double click on the output dataset.

As we can see, the record count has dropped from 730 records to 554 records.

Click the data tab and select “all fields”.  We can see each ID is now associated with a single row alongside the fields we created.

DEDUPLICATE

In this demonstration we will illustrate how to deduplicate or get rid of duplicate values.

Let’s use the Base Demographics dataset, for this demonstration we will use our aggregate demo workflow.

First, we need to remove duplicate rows.

Drag a Deduplicate node onto the canvas.

Connect the Base Demographics dataset.

Double click to open the wizard.

Give the target dataset an appropriate name and click run.

Double click the output.

Here, we can see that 194 duplicate rows were removed alongside the number of rows left.

Lastly, we want to Join both, our transactional and demographic datasets into one complete dataset.

Drag a Join node onto the canvas.

Connect both output datasets from the Aggregate and Deduplicate nodes.

Double click to open the wizard.

Select the field to use to match records, in this case ID.

Click next.

Set an appropriate name for the new dataset.

We will keep the default join method to include matching records only.

Click next.

Select the fields to include from the first dataset and click next.

Select the fields to include from the second dataset and click next.

Review the selected fields and click run.

Double click on the output dataset.

We can see that all 554 records from our transactional dataset were found in the demographics dataset.

Viewing the data tab, we can also see that each customer ID is now associated with various demographic fields as well.

