Weight of Evidence

In this demonstration we will be going over the Weight of Evidence node in Knowledge Studio.

Weight of Evidence is used to apply variable transformations by assigning a single number for each category or bin within each dataset field based on predictive power.

To begin first create a new workflow.

Link the Census dataset.

Drag the Weight of Evidence node to the workflow canvas.

Connect the Census dataset.

Note that Weight of Evidence transformations are usually applied to only the Training dataset instead of both training and validation.

Double click to open the wizard.

Set an appropriate name.

Set the dependent variable to Response and target category to Yes.

Select all fields except for Customer ID .

For more advanced options, the attribute editor is also available.

Click next.

On this page you can modify optional optimization options used to generate decision trees .

Tree Color tab allows you to customize the colors used to represent predictive values.

Tree Configuration tab allows adjustments to the orientation and layout of the tree.

Tree node tab is used to select information shown for each node.

Tree growth lets you set stopping criteria.

Split measure is used to set measure parameters used to build the tree.

Tree training can be used to change the split search and measure.

By default, Knowledge Studio uses optimal binning algorithms to bin numeric variables making it safe to continue without any changes.

Click next.

Now we can edit the bins manually and apply additional optimization options.

In the top left, various buttons are available to navigate and edit splits.

The decision tree view shows splits alongside weight of evidence values. By default these bins are generated through optimal binning algorithms mentioned earlier.

Similarly, below this we have a histogram representation for each split showing the size of each bin.

On the top right we have a line chart indicating percentage of Yes and No records along with weight of evidence values per bin.

Directly below this we can see a tabular representation of each bin and various calculated statistics. The 2nd table shows entropy and information values for this variable.

Lastly on the bottom right we have various options used to apply optimization techniques specifically to the current variable splits.

As we edit the bins, we want to keep an eye out on tree splits, line chart and changes in entropy and information value.

We can navigate between splits using Next and Previous split buttons.

To go to a specific split, click Go to Split.

By default, these splits are sorted from most to least information value.

Let’s go to the last split.

Since this variable is mainly for identification, we can use erase split to remove it. Generally, variables like this should be removed at the first page, alongside Customer ID.

Next go to capital gain split.

Under “Optimization” select Monotonic and set Enforce Equal size to 0.5

Click apply.

To remove an applied optimization click reset.

Additionally, you can apply optimization to all splits by clicking Optimize All.

Click Edit Split to open a range editor, allowing you to modify bins.

Lastly to reset all changes made to every split, click Reset Bins.

Once you’re happy with your bins click next.

This helper page lets you adjust the field name extension for transformed variables.

You can also choose to output a transformation report.

Click next.

Here you can review each Weight of Evidence variable along with your final Information Value. The expressions can be exported and used later when needed.

After reviewing click Run to generate an output.

Double click on the output

We can see the new variables added to our Census dataset.

Heading to data tab, we can also see that each variable’s values has been transformed to a Weight of Evidence value based on the splits we created earlier.

