Knowledge Studio provides a powerful node called Variable Transform, which lets you add transformed fields to your dataset.

Let’s have a look at how we can apply variable transformations.

Missing Values

We will look at how to examine missing values.

To begin, create a new workflow.

Link or Import the Census dataset.

Drag the Variable Transform node from the manipulate palette onto the canvas.

Connect the Census dataset.

Double click to open the wizard.

Set an appropriate target dataset name.

We will first look at how we can examine missing values.

Click “Calculate % Missing” to see the amount of missing values per field.

Here, we can see capital-gain has many missing values, we will handle this later in the demonstration.

For now, let’s apply a logarithmic transform to capital gain.

Click add field.

Set an appropriate field name.

Now we can either write the expression or we can use the function list to find our function of interest.

Let’s click functions and then select the math category.

If we scroll down we can see log, double click to add it to the expression.

The log function only accepts a numeric float value, in our case we want to use capital gain.

Again, we can either write capital gain or we can use the columns list to find it.

Click on columns and find capital gain, double click to insert it at your cursor location.

Let’s also add 1, to account for missing values we saw previously.

Before we click ok, we also want to enable “Force data to be instantiated” to ensure these transforms are written to our stored dataset.

In this case, we want to apply this transformation to multiple fields, such as capital gain and capital loss. We can do so by clicking transform fields.

We need to select the fields we want to transform.

Next write out the expression but instead of using a specific column we use Selected Field.

Enable “Force data to be instantiated”.

Click ok to create the new transformed fields.

Binning

Let’s have a look at how we can apply variable transformations using binning. We will continue from our missing values demo. Double click to open the existing variable transform node.

Now, let’s create a new binning transform for the relationship variable.

Click add field and set an appropriate name.

Since binning can require complex expressions, we can use helpers to assist us.

Click helpers.

Select binning from the drop down menu and click next.

Switch to discrete transform and select relationship.

Click next.

Using the range editor, group Husband and Wife into Married.

Group Not-in-family, Other-relative and Own-child into Other.

Click next.

Now we can see the created expression without the need of writing it out, lets click finish.

We can preview the transformation by clicking show data then clicking refresh.

Click ok to create the field.

Now let's have a look at the bins we created.

